No problem, I'll just shut this off.
We're now recording.
Thank you for agreeing to see us today, Doctor.
I'm just curious, you mentioned when we came in that this is called a national library in name, but it is really not precisely that.
I wonder what you meant by that.
Yes, because a century ago they decided to give the title of national library to all the libraries of the
ancient independent Italian states.
So in Piedmont, in Turin, in Milan, in Venice.
So there are many national libraries, as many as the ancient states which existed before the Union.
Italy, there are two real national libraries, one in Florence and one in Rome.
So there are national libraries?
These are really national, in the sense that they have the right to have a copy of every book published in Italy.
So they're deposit libraries?
They're deposit libraries.
How about in terms of the collections?
Are they national ones that go beyond the deposit, I mean, like the special collections?
Well, the national libraries, this means in reality state libraries.
I see.
And they should have...
something of every subject but of course it's impossible in modern culture so we try to specialise ourselves a little so in our case we are determined by our history in the sense that we have a lot of precious things of classical culture and in particularly Greek so we go on buying books in the field of philology
Greek and Latin, and humanism, tradition of texts, those kind of things.
And also history, because we have many books concerning the Venetian history, and so we buy all about Venice, all the books related to the Venetian history.
And in general, history.
We don't find medicine, we don't find law.
Of course you find ancient books of law, but not modern.
So it would be impossible to cover the whole range of human knowledge.
So, roughly, what is the size of your holdings?
A little less than a million books.
So it's not much.
If you compare it with the Library of Congress, how many are they?
100 million, so... 117 million, they say.
117 million.
It's not all books.
And it's all of America.
It's not, you know, you have a number of, as you've already pointed out, your specialty here is Venice and Greece, and you have other libraries throughout Italy that have similar specialties.
Yes, a sort of division.
And that more or less represents the Italian character and nation, doesn't it?
I mean, the nation itself is only 120-something years old, so it's not...
That would explain to a great extent why there are so many different... Ah, yes, of course, yes.
The unity is very recent, yes.
When you say a million books, that's printed and manuscripts?
Yes, yes.
The manuscripts are 13,000, and we have 13,000 manuscripts.
For 24,000 editions of the 16th century, Cinque Centine, 2,400
44, 46 Incunabula, and not much else.
If we could talk a little bit, we're very interested in the role of Venice and the fall of Constantinople and the migration of Greek texts and culture here.
This is a very, this library is a repository for a lot of that material, isn't it?
Yes, of course, yes, yes.
No, because we are born from the donation of Bessarion, who was a Greek, as you know.
It is to say that we started, the first idea of a public, of a library belonging to the state and open to the public in Venice was conceived by Petrarch.
Petrarcha.
That's a long time ago.
Long time ago, in 1360.
It was near to do it in 1362.
He proposed to the Venetian Republic a sort of agreement.
He said, I give you my library.
He had the most important library in Europe at the time.
After my death it will become property of the Venetian state.
But even now it would be open to the scholars and so on.
In exchange, you give me a house where I could live for my life.
So the Venetian state accepted.
There was a solemn proto.
This is from inside, so I cannot stop them.
I should make a circular... This is your work, and you're very kind to take the time from this.
Coming back to Petrarch, there was a solemn deliberation on the Great Council of Venice in September 1362, and
Petrarch came to Italy, to Venice.
He stayed here on the river degli Schiavoni for five years.
The house is no longer there, unfortunately.
But the place is, there is another building.
But then he changed his mind.
He went to Padova, carrying his life with him, and he left.
because he was not happy at the beginning, yes, but after the Doge, Chelsea, who was a friend of him, died, the great Chancellor Benintendi, who was another friend of him, died, the new Doge, Marco Corner, was not particularly interested, but mainly the fact was that he hoped to have more success, more followers,
But Venice was not yet prepared to this kind of vision of the world with humanistic.
They were more aristotelic, more interested in science, in medicine.
Petrarch hated the physicians.
So they couldn't... He preferred to go to Padua where the Signore was his friend.
And he stayed back there.
And so this project was not carried on.
It was not definitive.
The person who gave birth to the library was Cardinal Bessarian, who was an extraordinary figure of the humanistic world.
He was born in Trebizond at the beginning of the century.
Which century?
Potrocento, 15th century.
And he was born in Trebizond.
The date is not sure about the beginning of the century.
Then he went to Constantinople, he studied there with scholars.
He was still a great center of culture.
Then he became a monk, a Brazilian monk.
passed some years in Mistra, where there was a great scholar called Gemistos, Plato.
George Gemistos.
I don't know how he was in Greek.
Gemistos, I think.
It's Plato?
Plato.
So not Plato.
P-L-A-T-H.
Because he was a sort of surname, because he was a follower of Plato, the ancient.
And so he tried to, gemistos means full.
So he'd take a name with Plato, sort of translation of his name, and also reminded the name of Plato.
And so he's a great, an eccentric and extraordinary figure, a great, great scholar, and he was a pagan.
He was not a believer in any religion.
He was a follower of real ancient philosophy.
And Bessarion stayed there for some years, and he became familiar with the culture of ancient Greece.
He knew very well astronomy, all sciences, and also the classical literature.
Then he became Archbishop.
He came to Italy in 1438.
in order to participate to the council, the ecumenical council of Ferrara, Firenze, because they wanted to try to unite the two churches, the Greek and the Latin.
So he came here and he passed through Venice going to Ferrara and in this moment started a great friendship with many figures of the Venetian aristocracy and clergy.
And then he went to Ferrara to Florence.
He was the leader of the group who was in favor of the Union.
So he became the most important figure in this group of Greek.
And there were many bishops, archbishops and monks and so on.
Plato, Plato,
And then the Union was proclaimed in Florence, and the Stalinists were very happy, but unfortunately the Greeks did not accept it, because they found it probably, it has risen probably, they found it was a sort of trick made by the West in order to limit the liberty of the East.
The Emperor wanted it very strongly because he wanted to have allies against the Turks that were surrounding the city.
But the Greeks just said that this was not a solution.
And so, Vestalian remained in Rome.
He went back to Constantinople, seeing the atmosphere against the Union.
He preferred to come back to Rome.
He became a cardinal.
And then he devoted his life to
do all what he could to help his countrymen in Greece, organizing leagues against the Turks and so on, but with no success because of course he fell and so on.
But what he did in fact was to transform his private library into the Greek national library in some sense.
He wanted to buy or to have copied
for what he could find of the Greek ancient culture.
Not particularly the religious books, because there were many, but books which were in danger to be destroyed were the classical books, the ancient books.
And so he created a very important library, about a thousand books for the Epochism Arch, let's say six
600 Greeks and the remaining Latin.
And then, at the end of his life, he decided to give it to Venice because he thought it was the most proper place where these books would be kept, would be preserved.
And also there were many Greeks who came to Venice.
It was in Padova, the center of Greek culture.
Many friends of him had great positions in the government.
So he found that the
best place where to put his treasury was Venice.
And also there was a reason that Venice was the only European power who was effectively fighting against the Turks.
And he came here the first time in 1438.
Then he came back probably another time
in 1460.
Then he stayed for more than one year in 1463-64.
And then he made his donation in 1468.
The books arrived a year later, but he kept some books for himself because he was still active in culture and politics and so on.
And the remaining part right when he died in 72.
And was this called, what was this library called?
Was it named after him?
No, he gave it to Venice, to the Venetian state, to St.
Marco.
St.
Marco was a symbol of the Venetian state, so he gave it to St.
Marco in order to be governed by the procurators of St.
Marco, who were a great
had a very important position in the state.
They were the people who administered the wealth of the church.
There were also great political figures.
They came after the Doge, immediately after the Doge, in the pyramid of the Phoenician state.
it was in fact a donation to Venice to the Venetian public and in exchange Venice accepted the gift and promised to build a proper space for the library and this required a long time because they started only in 1527 and before the books were kept in the Ducal Palace in a room over here and
The idea was to create a Venetian library, a library of the state, open to scholars, like Petrarch.
It was the ancient dream of Petrarch, who was made effective by the Sarian.
Avanti.
The books went to Florence, I think, finally, didn't they?
Where did Petrarch's
They are still finding some of the books of his library in the most remote countries.
He should have given them here.
It was better.
It's a pity.
Because when he died, part of the library was bought by the Signore di Padova.
the Carraresi, the family of Carraresi.
Then Pada was conquered by Visconti, who carried the library to Milan.
Then Milan was conquered by the French, who takes part of it to France, partly dispersed the collection.
And so they are everywhere now, unfortunately.
So in 1527, where was the building that was built for the books?
This building here?
No, this is the Mint.
We are now in the Mint.
The nearby.
Well, we're going to see it in a minute.
The one which is on the piazza, you see.
On the piazza, in front of the Ducal Palace, that is this classical building called, born as a library.
What does Marciana mean?
Of St.
Mark.
So Biblioteca Nacional of St.
Of St.
Mark, yes.
It was the name, Marciana is the adjective for
which corresponds to St.
Mark.
Under the Venetian Republic it was called Liberia di San Marco or Publica Libreria, Public Library.
So the most common way to call it was Public Library.
Did the Venetians have their own dialect or did they all speak the same language?
Of course they have.
They still have their own dialect.
They do.
Yes.
But it's rather complicated because they spoke in normal life
Of course, they spoke Venetian.
In the Council, they spoke a sort of a nobler Venetian, similar to the Italian, more similar to the ideal Italian.
So there was always a bit complicated, because we didn't have a national language for the whole of Italy, but still the great writers like Dante,
Petrarca Boccaccio wrote in Florentine.
So if a person wanted to be cultivated, he spoke a sort of nobler dialect, similar to, very near to Florentine.
Could they understand each other?
I mean, were the languages close enough to each other that they could... Not much.
Really?
Even now, if you go to... For instance, if you go in Lombardy, you don't understand a word of the dialect.
Absolutely.
Not to speak for... about Sicily or... In fact, when Visconti, a great director of... film director of ours, made a film called La Terra Trema,
the earth trembles, and it was about Sicily, the life of Sicilians, in particular of the fishermen, poor fishermen, which was spoken in Sicily, but with under titles, because nobody would.
There must be a good biography of this Viserion.
I'm sure I'll be able to find
Oh, well, there are plenty.
A very famous person.
It's a wonderful story.
Now, was he Greek?
Did you say he was Greek?
Was he Orthodox?
Did he become Catholic?
Yes, because he made it a union, a union of churches.
But when the Greeks didn't accept it, he stayed... He remained unionistic.
Very interesting.
Very, very important.
Are these your predecessors up here?
Some are predecessors.
This is Bessarian.
Oh, that's Bessarian.
This is a copy of the original, which is in the Academia.
The portrait in the Academia.
So if I want to get a picture of him to use in my book, I contact the Academia.
But I want to purchase a picture with him.
Yes, perhaps, yes.
But also about him, there are plenty of portraits.
It's not so simple because there are portraits in Vienna, there are portraits in... There are many.
There are many.
The one in the middle you're pointing to?
Yes, yes, because here in his hands he has a precious reliquary which is still preserved in the Accademia.
It's still there.
Luckily it has not been robbed by any of all.
Yes, has there been much loss here through... In the library, not much.
because Napoleon took 470 books, but he gave them back, except with some exception, because when he fell, the Emperor of Austria wanted them back, and the French had to give them.
Some were changed in other books of less value, but this is not so important, because for the manuscript they came.
What do you consider, of course, I'm sure it's all your family, all of the million books, but what do you consider the most precious?
Without any doubt, the collection of Bessarion, the books, the Greek books given by Bessarion.
In particularly, that is, for instance, the so-called Homer A, Homerus Velitus A, number one, which is
The most important manuscript of the Iliad, for instance, which is a 10th century book with an extremely important commentary, for instance.
Homerus A. Homerus Venetus A. Is that the earliest surviving text of Homer, do you think?
Perhaps there are one which is a little older, but here, what is the...
Homer survives in thousands of manuscripts.
This is particularly important for the commentary because all around and in the middle there is a lot of commentaries which are the sort of resume of the summary of books concerning Homer which are now lost.
The Byzantine scholar had at his disposal a lot of books which after disappeared.
And so the great part of what the Greeks thought about Homer is preserved in this book.
That's wonderful.
For instance, we have the Planoidean anthology, which is the Greek epigrams for short poems survive in two manuscripts.
One is the Palatine anthology,
and the Planudean anthology, which is ours, made by a monk called Planudes in the year 1300.
So the two books together, they're not equal.
There are two anthologies made by two different persons, and so they cover all what remains of these short Greek poems.
And these again were Cardinal Vesarian?
Again Cardinal Vesarian.
Cardinal Vesarian bought, for instance,
the most ancient and precious manuscript of Hippocrates, the great physician, 10th century.
And we have a manuscript, the two most ancient and in practice, the whole of Phocios, who was a great scholar of the 9th century, beginning of 10th, who...
made a famous book called The Library of Mirio Biblon who made the summary of a hundred or more books.
Many of these books are lost and so they remain only in the summary and made by this patriarch who also has transcribed some
part of these books.
And so many, many books remain in these, in this compilation of thoughts.
And there are, what else, many, many other things of this quality.
But these are links with the ancient culture which would have been lost entirely if Cardinal Busserian had not had the foresight to gather them up
and bring them here.
Yes.
Perhaps the Lost would not have been so complete as it was thought at this moment, because many other things came out.
And then in some cases, yes, in some cases, for instance, Athenaeus.
Athenaeus is a book that I think remains only in this copy of Bessarion, which was a very scholarly book concerning
a discussion made by some scholars in the second century after Christ, which remains in practice in this copy much later, but of the 10th century, bought by Vassarion.
There are many, many other things.
Just to say, without his collections, certainly the knowledge we have about the Greek culture would be much less extended.
That was Athenaeus, you could say?
Athenaeus, yes.
And all these books are here in this building?
Yes, yes.
Will you be able to show us some of them?
Yes, some of them, yes, yes.
It's fascinating, isn't it?
I'm glad you enjoyed it.
I thought you should... But perhaps in the book written by Stichos you'll find, because Stichos made another book
which, unfortunately, is now borrowed by a person of mine.
You can find it in about Greek libraries in the world, or big libraries, or ancient libraries.
And there is a chapter concerning the Vassalian's library.
Stikos.
I'm going to contact him with this.
Stikos is your man.
Is he a professor, a teacher?
No, he is a...
A rich gentleman whose pleasure is to collect books.
He's a collector.
So if I send him a copy of my book... He will be delighted.
That's great.
I don't want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to... If you want to show you the... If you want to show you the... The rooms
Can we leave, should we leave our things here?
Or should we take them with us?
Perhaps it's better to wear.
Okay.
What was Cardinal Busserian's first name?
It's a very recent discovery that nobody knew, and now I've maybe found it.
It was Basilio.
Basilio, they say.
We are in the stacks now.
I'm sorry.
Oh, thank you.
Oh, my.
This is thrilling.
I've got goose pimples.
These are mainly the silent books.
Unfortunately, they have been re-bound in the .
These are the thousand books that he gave.
Look at some of these, Connie.
They are not particularly splendid to look at, but they are very precious.
Can you describe what you're holding in your hands, this particular book?
Well, let's find something more.
This is exciting.
Syntagma.
What is Syntagma?
Astronomia.
Astronomy.
And that's all in Greek, too?
They're all in Greek.
That's what's so important, isn't it?
So that's your label.
This is my label.
You said these were 19th century bindings, or 18th?
18th, yeah, they look more than 18th, yeah.
Is this, would you call this your rare book vault, or does this have a name, this room?
No name.
That's a folio-sized book on vellum.
Look at that.
This is Homer A. That's Homer A.
Where are the emendations?
Look at those.
These first pages are a little later.
They were made two centuries after.
These illustrations are probably made in southern Italy.
We don't know.
Oh, they're beautiful.
It's a sort of paraphrases of the poem made by Nonno.
He's eating a man?
Yes, this is a zodiac symbol.
I'm sorry, once again, what was that?
Zacharias?
Now, these are Greek or Italian illustrations?
No, it's all Greek.
The illustrations of the miniatures are perhaps made in southern Italy, but we don't know whether they are strange or little.
Not Greek, not of the capital.
But they're a thousand years old, perhaps, right?
No, they are of the 12th century.
The illustrations, but the text is a thousand.
The text is a thousand years old.
It's the 10th century.
Look at that.
Can you see the commentary, as I told you?
A thousand years.
Yeah, that's what you were saying.
So this was commentary on Homer.
This was literary criticism of the 10th century.
Not quite.
It's also of the 10th century, but also there is a sort of summary of what other scholars had said before.
So there is some original elaboration, but also there is a lot of information
It's very important.
It's very important that we don't have the original works of the many of the Alexandrian school, these great scholars.
The Alexandrian school, yes.
And they still have, for instance, in some of these verses, these signs, these symbols which were invented by the Alexandrians.
the Alexandrians, the Obelos, this means for instance, this verse is not, in my opinion, is not by Homer.
To be very synthetic, instead of repeating these ideas, they made a sign, there is a sort of six or seven symbols, which remain found in this particular manuscripts and in some
leaves or papyrus.
They knew that they existed.
They are visible only in here and in some fragments.
Is this your specialty?
No.
No, I would like it.
This is a beautiful library.
We are in the mint now.
Is that Dante over there?
It's Pichak.
It's a beautiful furniture.
Look at holding the book.
That is so wonderful.
Do they sell any books here with background or informational things that I could purchase, do you think?
Nothing in the library, per se, that you have any materials.
I wanted to show us.
Connie, do you want to show us something?
the prince started in his years probably it came to Italy because he he was a person who
This is written by his hand.
Now whose hand?
That's Bessarian's hand.
He wrote the position of the book.
The position you mean in the library?
So he was telling you, so he had his own
And what was that book you were holding?
That particular book?
Well, look at that.
That was the book you were telling us about.
Look at the decorations.
That's the cardinal's coat of arms?
Yes.
So this was illuminated for him?
engaged artists to decorate his books, do you think?
Some, some books are decorated, but he's not particularly interested in decoration, because we want to discuss things, but still some of them.
But what is interesting is that this is a printed book, you see, one of the first printed books in Italy, and these two printers who were German,
Feinheim and Pannard came to Rome in, to Italy in 1465 and to Rome.
Massimo.
And they set up their press in Palazzo Massimo, which we visited.
Yes.
And there it is right there, Massimo.
Massimo.
And what is the date on that?
Dung, 69.
1469.
Beautifully printed.
It's very clear.
Very clear.
The paper is absolutely extraordinary.
This is vellum.
That's vellum.
That's a beautiful vellum, isn't it?
The condition of the book is wonderful.
Wonderful.
And I wonder where the Cardinal got that, you know?
He got that here in Italy, obviously.
He must have acquired it when it was issued, do you think?
Of course, yes, because these printers were his
He brought them here.
He brought them here, that's right.
So probably the first copy was written.
You think this could possibly be one of the first books printed in Italy?
Not quite, because they have already started.
The first is made in Subiaco in 1965.
Then they moved to Rome in 68.
This is one of the first books printed in Rome.
And the title again, just so I'm sure we're talking about, what do you call this book?
What is with the cardinals?
Apuleius.
Italian Latin, Apuleius, Madaurensis, Madaurensis, Metamorphosis.
Oh, Metamorphosis, okay, good.
I can find that.
And what number is this in the library so I can check it against the catalog?
I mean , which means .
But the catalog number for the library, I think.
Ah, well, the catalog number.
No, for your catalog number.
Yes, this is the number.
Now I can check it against the catalog.
She loves the crest of a cardinal, his coat of arms.
It's a different world if that church is united.
I think also the Western health groups have been more effective.
They tried to do something in Western, but then there was a great battle in Barna.
There were problems
It was a defeat for the West, so they were no longer much willing to help them.
Because the temple and boy government Cesarino was killed, I think that time they were killed, and the birds were strong fighters.
And Venisa had to...
When the father came to Venice in 1463, he came also to persuade Venice to engage herself against the Turks.
And Venice decided to start a war in 17 years.
Really?
Are you from Venice?
Yes.
He's Venetian.
Can we take some of these?
These are the statues
given to the Renaissance Republic by Patriarch Grimani in 1587.
Originally kept in this room.
And what is it?
What do we call this building?
What is the name of this?
Libreria.
Libreria Sansoviniana.
I can say because Sansovino made it so they're great.
And it's right next door to, so it's still very close to where they were originally, the books.
Yes.
Those globes are magnificent too.
Made by Coronelli.
And you see on the walls it has Tintoretto.
Tintoretto.
So I'm just trying to, I mean, four kilometers of these two.
In the last series of the... ...the music, arithmetica and honor.
They all belong to the same period in the mid-15th century, with these two exceptions, Straussi and Padovanino, which were made in...
1635, because the water had damaged the tools, which existed before.
I notice that scholarship is present in all of these murals here, pretty much.
There's book, there are books, books.
No, the books were kept probably in things like these.
No, but I mean in the paintings.
Ah, in the paintings.
That's right.
This is magnificent.
This is an exhibition, not ours.
It's textiles mainly.
These textiles will go away soon.
And then we used to have an exhibition from the library here.
We had sometimes exhibitions.
So this was the room that was built for the Cardinal's books.
They did a very noble job, didn't they?
They built a beautiful building for them.
Late as well.
Now these globes are date from when?
Coronelli.
1688, okay, so they knew about the... But look, they have California as an island.
Ah, that's true.
Look at this, honey.
You don't ever get a lake yet?
Oh, my!
And what is this, doctor?
There's up the town, you know?
He's going in there.
Okay, okay.
But that's the mapamundo.
Mapamundo.
Diframabro.
1459.
I notice it's heading east.
The east is to the top.
Jerusalem would be at the center.
It's huge.
The south is there.
There's no.
So you see Italy, Italy, Spain, Greece.
It's magnificent.
Oh, it's upside down.
That's 1459.
That's 40 years before Columbus.
That's wonderful.
That's great.
How long have you been at this library?
Twenty years.
Twenty.
Excuse me.
So this right here is the library.
This is the library.
I mean, right here is the library.
Here is nothing.
Here is empty.
Now it's the library.
And this is the second floor.
You're very, very generous with your times.
I don't think we have to take a... Well, if I can do something else...
I think this is wonderful.
Well, I'm glad you enjoyed the visit.
Thank you so much.
And I'll be in touch.
And I'll make sure you get a copy.
Thank you for the book.
Thank you.
And I'll make sure you get the new one, too.
I'll send you a copy of the new book.
Thank you.
I'm glad we came over early, you know?